# Authentication

## Client Login Strategies

Our authentication methods are defined via “strategies” in our client code. These strategies are:

- Password Login Strategy: Authentication with an email address and master password.
- Passwordless Login Strategy: Authentication with a
  [Login with Device](https://bitwarden.com/help/log-in-with-device/) one-time access code.
- API Login Strategy: Authentication with an API key and secret.
- SSO Login Strategy: Authentication with an SSO IdP through SAML or OpenIDConnect.

Regardless of the strategy, “logging in” to Bitwarden requires `POST`ing a request to the
`/connect/token` endpoint on our Identity server. The contents of this request vary by several
factors, but the most important is the login strategy.

## Step 1: Client requests a token

For each of these strategies, the client forms a
[`TokenRequest`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/auth/models/request/identity-token/token.request.ts)
though one of its subclasses:

- [`PasswordTokenRequest`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/auth/models/request/identity-token/password-token.request.ts) -
  used by Password and Passwordless Login Strategy
- [`UserApiTokenRequest`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/auth/models/request/identity-token/user-api-token.request.ts) -
  used by API Login Strategy
- [`SSOTokenRequest`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/auth/models/request/identity-token/user-api-token.request.ts) -
  used by SSO Login Strategy

Each of these requests overrides the `toIdentityToken()` method, which is responsible for
translating the information in the `TokenRequest` into the payload that will be sent to the
`/connect/token` endpoint on our Identity server.

### Common properties of all authentication requests

The following properties are common to authentication requests generated from all of our login
strategies.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Property | Purpose |
| --- | --- |
| `deviceType` | The [`DeviceType`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/enums/device-type.enum.ts) for the requesting device. |
| `deviceName` | The string representation of the [`DeviceType`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/enums/device-type.enum.ts) for the requesting device. |
| `deviceIdentifier` | The unique identifier for the device, generated on the device when the application is installed. 
| `twoFactorToken` | For users who have two-factor authentication enabled, contains the token generated by the 2FA provider. Empty otherwise. See [Two-Factor Authentication](./two-factor-auth.md) for details. |
| `twoFactorTokenProvider` | The 2FA provider that generated the token in `twoFactorToken`. Empty otherwise. |
| `twoFactorRemember` | Indicates whether the user has requested to remember their 2FA choice. |

### Type-specific authentication request properties

#### Password Token Requests

- **Grant Type**: `password`
- **Headers**: `Auth-Email` header is set to base-64 encoding of user email address

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Content Property | Description |
| ----------------- | ------------ |
| `client_id`       | The `ClientType` enum value for the type of client making the request. |
| `scope`           | `api` `offline access` |
| `username`        | Email address |
| `password`        | Master Password Hash or access code if Login with Device |
| `captchaResponse` | Captcha response token if provided (see [Captcha documentation](./../captchas/index.md) for details) |
| `authRequest`     | The Login with Device authentication request ID, if this is a Login with Device request |

#### API Token Requests

- **Grant Type**: `client_credentials`
- **Headers**: None

| Content Property | Description                                                                       |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `client_id`      | `client_id` provided by API client                                                |
| `client_secret`  | `client_secret` provided by API client                                            |
| `scope`          | `api.organization` if the `client_id` starts with “organization”, `api` otherwise |

#### SSO Token Requests

- **Grant Type**: `authorization_code`
- **Headers**: None

| Content Property | Description                                                           |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `code`           | Code provided on SSO login in the code query string parameter         |
| `code_verifier`  | Unique 64-digit verifier generated prior to SSO request on the client |
| `redirect_uri`   | Set to `/sso-connector.html` in `SsoComponent` and `LinkSsoComponent` |

## Step 2: Identity API grants access

When the Identity service receives the token request at the `/connect/token` endpoint, one of two
classes take over, based on the grant type specified in the authentication request.

For more information on the responsibility of each of these validators, see the
[IdentityServer4 documentation](https://identityserver4.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).

### Validating the request

#### Password Token Validation (`ResourceOwnerPasswordValidator`)

:::tip What grant type?

This validator is responsible for issuing tokens for `password` grant type.

:::

In order for the request to be validated, the following must be true:

- The `Auth-Email` header must be present and correct.
- The request does not require Captcha, or if it does a valid `captchaResponse` is provided (see
  [Captcha documentation](./../captchas/index.md) for details).
- The request does not require 2FA, or if it does a valid `twoFactorToken` is provided (see
  [2FA documentation](two-factor-auth.md))
- If the request has an `authRequest` property (i.e. is a Passwordless request), the access code is
  valid and the request has not expired.
- The password is correct. This could be either:
  - The master password hash matches the database record for the user, or
  - The Login with Device access code has not expired and matches the server-side code on the
    `authRequest` presented by the client.
- The user is not part of an organization that requires SSO.

#### API Token Request Validation (`CustomTokenRequestValidator`)

:::tip What grant type?

This validator is responsible for issuing tokens for `client_credential` grant type.

:::

There are different types of clients that can request access with the client_credential grant type:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Client Type  | Purpose |
| ------------ | ------- |
| Installation | Used for private client communication from the self-hosted API to the push relay for mobile push notifications. Each self-hosted installation authenticates as itself and has access to submit push notification requests. |
| Internal     | Used for communication between the API and Notifications services. This is only used for self-hosted installations, where notifications are sent directly to the SignalR notification hub instead of going to an Azure Queue. |
| Organization | Used for organizations to make changes on behalf of the organization and not individual users. |
| User         | Used for individual users to perform actions using their own API token. In this case, the user’s claims are added to the `access_token` as if the user were logging in via the password flow. |

The different API client types all have different validation. The key to `client_credentials` grant
type validation is the `ClientStore` that is built in to IdentityServer (and
[overridden](https://github.com/bitwarden/server/blob/master/src/Identity/IdentityServer/ClientStore.cs)
in our code). The `ClientStore` is queried on each request in the .NET request middleware pipeline
to find the client for a given `client_id` from the request.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Client Type  | Validation Logic |
| ------------ | ---------------- |
| Installation | Ensure that the provided `client_secret` matches the installation key for the installation ID provided in `client_id`. |
| Internal     | Ensure that the provided `client_secret` matches the `InternalIdentityKey` configured in Global Settings. If Identity and API are sharing the same configuration, these will match by definition. |
| Organization | Ensure that the provided `client_secret` matches the installation key for the organization ID provided in `client_id`. |
| User         | Ensure that the provided `client_secret` matches the API key for the user ID provided in `client_id`. |

#### SSO Token Request Validation (`CustomTokenRequestValidator`)

:::tip What grant type?

This validator is responsible for issuing tokens for `authorization_code` grant type.

:::

The validation of the code in the authorization_code in the request is done by IdentityServer (see
the documentation
[here](https://identityserver4.readthedocs.io/en/latest/topics/grant_types.html#interactive-clients)).
The code has been obtained via an SSO flow and is now being presented to IdentityServer to exchange
for an `access_token`.

### Generating a response

Once the request has been validated through the appropriate logic for the given grant type, the
Identity API will generate a response. At Bitwarden, this response contains an `access_token` with
claims and also a custom JSON object that contains essential information to start the vault
decryption process.

:::info Known Device

It is at this point, when the token request has been validated, that the requesting device is stored
and associated with the user as a “known device”.

:::

#### Authentication Information

For a validated password and SSO token requests (grant types of `password` and
`authorization_code`), the response will contain an `access_token`, which is a JWT with the
following claims:

- `device` - the device identifier.
- `premium` - a boolean indicating whether they have access to premium features.
- `email` - the user’s email address.
- `email_verified` - whether the user has verified their email address.
- `sstamp` - the user’s security stamp (a unique GUID for the user stored in the `User` table and
  regenerated when a new password or key is generated). A changed `sstamp` indicates that the user
  should re-authenticate.
- `name` - The user’s name.
- **Organization claims**
  - `orgowner` - The `ID` of any org(s) for which the user is the owner.
  - `orgadmin` - The `ID` of any org(s) for which the user is the administrator.
  - `orgmanager` - The `ID` of the org(s) for which the user is the manager.
  - `orguser` - The `ID` of the org(s) for which the user is a user.
  - `orgcustom` - The `ID` of the org(s) for which the user has custom permissions. In this case,
    the user will also have custom claims added as defined for that org.
- **Provider claims**
  - `providerprovideradmin` - The `ID` of the provider(s) for which the user is an admin.
  - `providerserviceuser` - The `ID` of the provider(s) for which the user is a user.

For API token requests (grant type of `client_credentials`), the response differs based on the
client type, as follows:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Client Type  | Claims |
| ------------ | ------ |
| Installation | `sub` - the installation `ID` |
| Internal     | `sub` - the internal `ID` |
| Organization | `sub` - the organization `ID` |
| User         | `sub` - the user ID <br /> `amr` - set to `Application` and `external` <br /> Plus all of the user claims from a password authentication request as listed above. |

#### Decryption Information

The response will also contain a custom JSON response object containing the following properties:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Property | Purpose |
| -------- | -------- |
| `PrivateKey` | The user’s RSA private key, encrypted with the user's symmetric encryption key. |
| `Key` | The user’s symmetric encryption key, encrypted with the user's master password. |
| `UserDecryptionOptions` | The ways that the user has available to them to decrypt their symmetric key. See [User Decryption Options](#appendix-userdecryptionoptions-details) for details. |
| `Kdf` | The user’s defined KDF type. |
| `KdfIterations` | The user’s defined KDF iterations. |
| `ForcePasswordReset`  | A boolean indicating whether the user must immediately reset their password. |
| `MasterPasswordPolicy` | The master password policy for any organizations of which the user is a member. |
| `TwoFactorToken` | A token that can be used to bypass 2FA. Generated when a user chooses to "remember" their 2FA response. |
| `ResetMasterPassword` (_obsolete_) | A boolean indicating whether the user needs to set their master password. It is explicitly set to `false` for users with Key Connector configured. This has been superseded by `UserDecryptionOptions.HasMasterPassword` but has been left for backward compatibility. |

For API token requests, the following additional properties are added to the response:

- `ApiUseKeyConnector` - set to `true` if the user is set to use Key Connector for master password
  retrieval.

## Step 3: Client handles the response

When a token request is verified and sent back to the client, the client is responsible for storing
the resulting data in state properly, so that the user can authenticate and their vault can be
decrypted.

The core logic for handling the token responses is in the `processTokenResponse()` method in our
base
[`LoginStrategy`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/auth/login-strategies/login.strategy.ts).
There, we do the following:

### Use the Authentication Information to Set up the User’s Account

The response contains a JWT `access_token` that contains user claims and that can be provided on
subsequent API requests to authenticate the user, as well as a `refresh_token` that can be used to
request a new `access_token` without prompting the user to authenticate again.

The claims on the `access_token` are used to initialize the user's `AccountProfile` in state, and
the `access_token` and `refresh_token` are stored on the `AccountTokens` in state for use on
subsequent API requests.

### Use the Decryption Information to Prepare for Decryption

The `AccountKeys` (stored in `account.keys` in state) are also set up in the user's account using
the information provided in the token response.

The important keys that are set at this point are:

#### Device Key (`deviceKey`)

The Device Key is the symmetric encryption key stored on the user's trusted device and is used to
decrypt the user's symmetric encryption key when using Trusted Device Encryption.

It is not returned on the request (as it never leaves the device), but it is set on the
authenticated user's account state at this point.

#### User Key (`userKey`)

The User Key is the symmetric encryption key used to decrypt the user's vault.

The specifics of how the User Key is set are defined in each login strategy:

- **Password and Login with Device strategies**
  - The `Key` in the token response is stored in `userKeyMasterKey` in the account state, and the
    `masterKey` already in state from the user entering their master password is used to decrypt and
    store the `userKey`.
- **API strategy**
  - The `Key` in the token response is stored in `userKeyMasterKey` in the account state.
  - If the `ApiUseKeyConnector` property is set on the token response, we retrieve the `masterKey`
    from state and use it to decrypt and store the `userKey`.
- **SSO strategy**
  - Trusted Device Encryption presents us with multiple ways to obtain the User Key, and these are
    handled here, in the SSO login strategy.
  - These include:
    - Using the device key if the user is on a Trusted Device
    - Using an approved Admin Approval request to receive the key
    - Using the master key if the user has a master password

#### User Private Key (`privateKey`)

If a `PrivateKey` is provided in the response, it is stored in `privateKey.encrypted` in the user's
account state.

## Appendix: `UserDecryptionOptions` Details

The token response will contain an instance of `UserDecryptionOptions`. This object contains the
following properties, which describe how a user will be able to decrypt their vault.

- `HasMasterPassword` - Will be `true` if the user has a master password in the database.
- `TrustedDeviceOption` - Contains the properties defining whether a user can decrypt their
  symmetric key using Trusted Device Encryption.
  - `HasAdminApproval` - Will be `true` if a user can use Admin Approval to request approval for a
    new Trusted Device.
  - `HasLoginApprovingDevice` - Will be `true` if a user has any eligible ("known") devices that can
    be used to request approval for a new Trusted Device.
  - `HasManageResetPasswordPermission` - Will be `true` if the user has the `ManageResetPassword`
    permission. This is required so that the receiving client can know whether to require the user
    to set a master password.
  - `EncryptedPrivateKey` - If the device making the request is trusted, this will contain the a
    device-specific private key, encrypted with the device key that exists only on the Trusted
    Device.
  - `EncryptedUserKey` - If the device making the request is trusted, this will contain the user's
    symmetric encryption key, encrypted with the public key corresponding to the private key in
    `EncryptedPrivateKey` above.
- `KeyConnectorOption` - Contains the properties defining whether a user can decrypt their symmetric
  key using Key Connector.
  - `KeyConnectorUrl` - The URL for the Key Connector instance.
