# Two-Factor Authentication

When a user account requires two-factor authentication (2FA), the normal Bitwarden authentication
flow is diverted in order to handle the 2FA request.

## Initial Authentication Request

When the Identity API receives an authentication request for a user, part of the
[validation process](./#validating-the-request) is to ensure that the user's account does not
require two-factor authentication.

If the account (or the user's organization) requires 2FA, the `/connect/token` endpoint returns a
response with an HTTP status code `400`, an `Error` value of `invalid_grant`, and an `ErrorMessage`
of "_Two factor required_". The response will also include a `CustomResponse` with the following
JSON data:

```json
{
    { "TwoFactorProviders", [2FA provider keys] },
    { "TwoFactorProviders2", [2FA provider data] },
    { "MasterPasswordPolicy", [Master password policy] },
    // Only if the user has email 2FA
    { "SsoEmail2faSessionToken", [Token to allow email to be passed through SSO flow] }
}
```

## Handling 2FA Response on the Client

If the client detects a
[`IdentityTwoFactorResponse`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/libs/common/src/auth/models/response/identity-two-factor.response.ts)
when attempting to log in, it extracts the available 2FA providers from the `CustomResponse` and
presents those to the user.

Each 2FA method has its own UI, but in all cases the user will generate a "token" of some sort to
capture the user's response. This token is captured on the
[`TwoFactorComponent`](https://github.com/bitwarden/clients/blob/master/apps/desktop/src/auth/two-factor.component.ts)
when the user completes the 2FA process.

Once the user has entered their 2FA, a new authentication request is `POST`ed to the
`/connect/token` endpoint with the same contents as the original, failed request, with the following
additions to the request body:

- `twoFactorToken` is set to the token generated by the user's 2FA response
- `twoFactorProvider` is set to the provider used for 2FA
- `twoFactorRemember` is set based on whether the user chose to "remember" their 2FA response

## Validating Request with 2FA Response

When the Identity API receives the second authentication request that includes the additional 2FA
properties, it performs the authentication process again.

This time, the server is able to validate the 2FA response. To do this, it calls `ValidateAsync` on
the relevant `IUserTwoFactorTokenProvider` implementation for the `twoFactorProvider` sent by the
client in the request.

If the token is valid, a successful response is
[generated and returned to the client](./index.md#generating-a-response). If the user chose to
remember their 2FA entry, this response includes a token in the `TwoFactorToken` property that can
be included on subsequent requests to bypass 2FA.
