---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Android

## Requirements

- Android Studio - Latest stable version
- Android SDK - For the SDK Platform version, refer to the `compileSdk` version in the
  [libs.versions.toml](https://github.com/bitwarden/android/blob/main/gradle/libs.versions.toml)
  file

## Setup

1. Clone the repository:

   ```sh
   $ git clone https://github.com/bitwarden/android
   ```

2. Create a `user.properties` file in the root directory of the project and add the following
   properties:

   - `gitHubToken`: A "classic" Github Personal Access Token (PAT) with the `read:packages` scope
     (ex: `gitHubToken=gph_xx...xx`). These can be generated by going to the
     [Github tokens page](https://github.com/settings/tokens). See
     [the Github Packages user documentation concerning authentication](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-gradle-registry#authenticating-to-github-packages)
     for more details.
   - `localSdk`: A boolean value to determine if the SDK should be loaded from the local maven
     artifactory (ex: `localSdk=true`). This is particularly useful when developing new SDK
     capabilities. Review
     [Linking SDK to clients](https://contributing.bitwarden.com/getting-started/sdk/#linking-the-sdk-to-clients)
     for more details.

3. Setup the code style formatter:

   All code must follow the guidelines described in the
   [Code Style Guidelines document](docs/STYLE_AND_BEST_PRACTICES.md). To aid in adhering to these
   rules, all contributors should apply `docs/bitwarden-style.xml` as their code style scheme. In
   IntelliJ / Android Studio:

   - Navigate to `Preferences > Editor > Code Style`.
   - Hit the `Manage` button next to `Scheme`.
   - Select `Import`.
   - Find the `bitwarden-style.xml` file in the project's `docs/` directory.
   - Import "from" `BitwardenStyle` "to" `BitwardenStyle`.
   - Hit `Apply` and `OK` to save the changes and exit Preferences.

   Note that in some cases you may need to restart Android Studio for the changes to take effect.

   All code should be formatted before submitting a pull request. This can be done manually but it
   can also be helpful to create a macro with a custom keyboard binding to auto-format when saving.
   In Android Studio on OS X:

   - Select `Edit > Macros > Start Macro Recording`
   - Select `Code > Optimize Imports`
   - Select `Code > Reformat Code`
   - Select `File > Save All`
   - Select `Edit > Macros > Stop Macro Recording`

   This can then be mapped to a set of keys by navigating to `Android Studio > Preferences` and
   editing the macro under `Keymap` (ex : shift + command + s).

   Please avoid mixing formatting and logical changes in the same commit/PR. When possible, fix any
   large formatting issues in a separate PR before opening one to make logical changes to the same
   code. This helps others focus on the meaningful code changes when reviewing the code.

## Dependencies

For Application, Development Environment, and CI/CD dependencies, refer to the
[libs.versions.toml](https://github.com/bitwarden/android/blob/main/gradle/libs.versions.toml) file.
