---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# F-Droid

## Overview

The Bitwarden F-Droid repository is hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/bitwarden/f-droid). It
contains all Bitwarden apps that are available on F-Droid.

The Bitwarden F-Droid repository is automatically updated periodically to ensure the apps hosted in
the repository are up to date with the latest versions released in the Google Play Store.

## Setup

### Go

Go is required to build and run the `metascoop` app.

To download and install Go with Homebrew run :

```bash
brew install go
```

Other download and installation options can be found on the
[Go installation documentation](https://go.dev/doc/install).

### F-Droid server and repo tools

To manually update the F-Droid repository, F-Droid server and repo tools are required. Installation
instructions can be found on the official
[F-Droid server and repo tools documentation](https://f-droid.org/en/docs/Installing_the_Server_and_Repo_Tools/).

### Android SDK

F-Droid Server and Repo Tools requires `apksigner`, which is part of the Android SDK.

To install the required Android SDK tools using Homebrew run:

```bash
brew install android-sdk
android update sdk --no-ui --all --filter tools,platform-tools,build-tools-25.0.0
```

Alternate instructions for downloading and installing the required Android SDK tools can be found
[here](https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/platform-tools).

## File Structure

The repository is organized into the following structure:

- `fdroid/`: The F-Droid repository where applications are hosted.
- `metascoop/`: The Go app used to update the F-Droid repository when a new version of a Bitwarden
  app is released.
- `repos.yml`: The file that defines the source repositories and F-Droid applications available to
  be hosted.

### `repos.yml`

This file contains details about the source repositories that `metascoop` will search for new
F-Droid releases. It uses the following structure to declare repositories and their applications:

```yaml
my-repository:
  git: "https://github.com/bitwarden/android"
  applications:
    - filename: "com.x8bit.bitwarden-fdroid.apk"
      id: "bitwarden"
      name: "Bitwarden"
      categories:
        - Security
      description: |
        My awesome app description.
```

- `my-repository`: The name of the repository. This is used to identify the repository in the index.
- `git`: The URL of the source repository.
- `applications`: The applications that are available in the repository. Multiple applications can
  be added to the repository by adding a new entry to the `applications` list.
  - `filename`: The name of the APK file that will be downloaded from the source repository.
  - `id`: The ID of the application. This must be unique and is used to identify the application in
    the F-Droid repository.
  - `name`: The name of the application displayed to users when viewing applications in F-Droid.
  - `categories`: The categories that the application belongs to. This is used to categorize the
    application in F-Droid.
  - `description`: The description displayed to users when viewing the application in F-Droid.

### `metascoop/`

Bitwarden's F-Droid repository is configured to automatically update apps when a new version is
detected in one of the source repositories defined in `repos.yml`.

This is done by using the `metascoop` app to fetch the latest version of the source repository and
then update the repository index.

The `metascoop` app is run periodically by the CI/CD pipeline to ensure the repository index stays
up to date.

When changes are detected in the source repository, any new releases will be added to the F-Droid
repository, and `fdroid update` will be executed to update F-Droid server and repo metadata. The
CI/CD pipeline will automatically create a pull request to update the repository with these changes.

### `fdroid/`

The majority of files within this directory are generated by the `metascoop` app and `fdroid` tools.
Some files cannot be automatically generated and must be manually edited.

#### F-Droid repo configuration

F-Droid repository is configured in a `config.yml` file. This includes details like the name,
description, and archive settings. This file is not tracked for security purposes.

#### Repository icon

The F-Droid repository icon is stored in `fdroid/icon.png`.

#### Application images

Some application metadata, such as the application icons, feature graphics, and screenshots, are not
defined in the `repos.yml` file and must be placed in the correct location within the F-Droid
repository.

The following directory structure is used to store the application images:

- `fdroid/repo/<app-id>/<locale>/icon.png`: The application icon.
- `fdroid/repo/<app-id>/<locale>/feature-graphic.png`: The feature graphic.
- `fdroid/repo/<app-id>/<locale>/<screen-type>Screenshots/*.png`: Screenshots from various devices.
  I.e. `fdroid/repo/com.x8bit.bitwarden/en-US/phoneScreenshots/login-screenshot.png`.

Details on the metadata file structure can be found in the official F-Droid docs,
[here](https://f-droid.org/en/docs/All_About_Descriptions_Graphics_and_Screenshots/#in-the-f-droid-repo).

### Testing

#### Local testing

The `run_metascoop.sh` and `update_repo.sh` scripts can be executed to manually check for new
releases and update the F-Droid repository. This can be especially helpful for testing.

When executing `run_metascoop.sh` locally, the repository keystore is required because
`fdroid update` is executed as part of the process.

A temporary keystore can be generated by running `fdroid init` in the `fdroid` directory and
following the prompts. This will result in the `config.yml` and `keystore.p12` files being generated
with default values.

To generate a new keystore and config, run:

```bash
cd fdroid
fdroid init
```

<Bitwarden>

:::note

If you need access to the production F-Droid keystore and config, reach out to your manager.

:::

</Bitwarden>

:::warning

Never push changes signed by a locally generated keystore or config.

Using a locally generated keystore or config forces regeneration of ALL metadata and re-signs the
repository. These changes should only be used for local testing.

:::

It's possible to run a local F-Droid server for end-to-end testing. This type of testing requires
setting up your machine as a web-server and copying the entire repository into your web root
directory. Instructions on setting up a local demo repository can be found in the official F-Droid
docs, [here](https://f-droid.org/docs/Setup_an_F-Droid_App_Repo/#local-demo-repo-howto).

:::note

In order to connect to your local repository from an Android emulator use `10.0.2.2` instead of
`localhost`.

:::

:::info MacOS users

If using _nginx_ as the web server, and it is installed using Homebrew the web root is located at
`/opt/homebrew/var/www/`.

To start/stop _nginx_ run:

```bash
brew services start nginx
brew services stop nginx
```

By default, _nginx_ will listen on port `8080` when started from _homebrew_. An example of the local
server URL, when entered from an emulator, should look like: `http://10.0.2.2:8080/fdroid/repo`

:::

#### Remote testing

The `fdroid.yml` workflow can be triggered from the GitHub Actions tab. The workflow can be run
without publishing changes by checking the "Dry run" checkbox. Be default, the workflow will publish
the changes to the F-Droid repository.

## Security

The F-Droid repository is signed with a certificate owned by Bitwarden. Users can verify the
validity of the repository by comparing the signature against the fingerprint provided in the
`README.md` file.

## Credits

The GitHub repository was forked and adapted from
[xarantolus/fdroid](https://github.com/xarantolus/fdroid).
