# P01 - Servers are not trusted

Clients do not need to trust Bitwarden's server or other web infrastructure to act as good actors in
order to keep an account's encrypted content secure. The special status of providing a network sync
for client data does not grant the server, or any intermediary between the server and client, the
ability to reduce the effective security of the protections that guard a user's data. If a user
chooses a weaker form of protection (e.g., a password instead of a passkey), that is an intentional
user decision, but the server must not be able to manipulate or coerce a client into reducing
security beyond what the user knowingly configures. In addition to inability to weaken a user's
encrypted data, the server and any necessary infrastructure cannot masquerade chosen clear text data
as belonging in the set of a users encrypted data. The total sum of a user's encrypted data is fully
isolated from the server and infrastructure. It cannot be read nor expanded outside of the user's
client context

This is what we mean when we sometimes refer to "End-to-end encrypted."

## Account key sharing as a feature

This principle does not mean that clear text data is never shared, but rather that any such exposure
requires informed and explicit consent from the user and is exclusively between accounts, never to
the server or infrastructure.

## Exceptions

On occasion, product features require breaking this principle in a controlled manner. These
exceptions are always a last resort, tightly limited scope, and we are always looking for
improvements to remove them. All exceptions are outlined here.

### Key Connector

Key connector is a self-host only feature that allows an organization user to log in and unlock with
SSO and no password input. This feature is specifically limited to self-hosted instances due to this
principle. It is possible for a Bitwarden server to create an authentication token, contact the Key
Connector server, and retrieve key material that will allow decryption of a user's vault. For these
reasons we encourage strict isolation of key connector servers to private networks and only to be
used by advanced self-hosted users.

### Icons service

The Bitwarden icons service provides site favicons to decorate vault items in the Bitwarden clients.
To enable this functionality, clients need to send clear text domain name information to the
service. Communicated information is limited to vault item URIs matching some simple structural
requirement. These URIs are encrypted in a vault, but we do this to aggregate access to the
requested domain, speed up loading of vaults, and ensure favicons accurately represent the
associated URI. This feature is easily disabled in client settings.
